.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH DPTSV 1 "2005-05-23" "Man Page" "Quick Database Manager"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
dptsv \- mutual converter between TSV and QDBM Depot database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dptsv import
.RI "[-bnum " num "] [-bin] " name
.br
.B dptsv export
.RI "[-bin] " name
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B dptsv
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.

The command \fIdptsv\fP features mutual conversion between a database
of Depot and a TSV text. This command is useful when data exchange
with another version of QDBM or another DBM, or when data exchange
between systems which have different byte orders. This command is used
in the above format. \fIname\fP specifies a database name.
.PP
The subcommand \fBexport\fP reads TSV data from the standard input.  If a key
overlaps, the latter is adopted. \fB-bnum\fP specifies the number of the
elements of the bucket array. The subcommand \fBimport\fP writes TSV data
to the standard output.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the
file:///usr/share/doc/qdbm-doc/spex.html#depotcli.
.TP
.BI "\-bnum "num
specify the number of the elements of the bucket array.
.TP
.B \-bin
treat records as Base64 format.
.SH EXAMPLES
For example, to make a
database to search `/etc/password' by a user name, perform the following
command.
.br
\fB    cat /etc/passwd | tr ':' '\t' | dptsv import casket\fP
.br
.PP
Thus, to retrieve the information of a user `mikio', perform the following
command.
.br
\fB    dpmgr get casket mikio\fP
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qdbm (3),
.BR dpmgr (1),
.BR dpopen (3).
.SH AUTHOR
QDBM was written by Mikio Hirabayashi <mikio@fallabs.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Fumitoshi UKAI <ukai@debian.or.jp>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
