.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH ODIDX 1 "2005-05-23" "Man Page" "Quick Database Manager"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
odidx \- indexer of document files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B odidx register
.RI "[-l " file "] [-wmax " num "] [-tsuf " sufs "] [-hsuf " sufs "] " name "[" dir "]"
.br
.B odidx relate
.I name
.br
.B odidx purge
.I name
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B odidx
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
The command \fBodidx\fP is a utility for indexing files on the local
file system.  This command is useful for a full-text search system of
a Web site. Supported file format are plain text and HTML. Supported
character encoding are US-ASCII and ISO-8859-1. The URI of each
document is specified with the path of its file. Attributes named as
\fItitle\fP and \fIdate\fP are given to each documents. When a document
is already existing in the database, it is registered if its last
modification time is newer, or it is ignored. Modification times are
stored in the sub database `_mtime' in the main database
directory. Score information are stored in the sub database `_score'
in the main database directory. This command is used in the above
format. \fIname\fP specifies a database name.  \fIdir\fP specifies a
directory name.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the
file:///usr/share/doc/qdbm-doc/spex.html#odeumcli.
.TP
.BI "\-l " file
read a file and get list of paths of files to register. If `-' is
specified, the standard input is read.
.TP
.BI "\-wmax " num
specify the max number of words to be stored in the document database.
.TP
.BI "\-tsuf " sufs
specify suffixes of plain text files in comma separated
format. The default is `-tsuf .txt,.text'.
.TP
.BI "\-hsuf " sufs
specify suffixes of HTML files in comma separated format. The
default is `-hsuf .html,.htm'.
.SH EXAMPLES
For example, to register files which are under `/home/mikio' and whose
suffix are `.txt', `.c', or `.h', perform the following command.
.br
\fB     odidx register -tsuf ".txt,.c,.h" -hsuf "" casket /home/mikio\fP
.br
.PP
Thus, to retrieve documents which include `unix' and `posix' and show the top 8
terms, perform the following command.
.br
\fB     odmgr search -max 8 -h casket "unix posix"\fP
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qdbm (3),
.BR odmgr (1),
.BR odeum (3),
.BR odopen (3).
.SH AUTHOR
QDBM was written by Mikio Hirabayashi <mikio@fallabs.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Fumitoshi UKAI <ukai@debian.or.jp>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
