.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH CBCODEC 1 "2005-05-23" "Man Page" "Quick Database Manager"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
cbcodec \- popular encoders and decoders
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cbcodec url
.RI "[-d] [-br] [-rs " base " " target "] [-l] [-e " expr "] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec base
.RI "[-d] [-l] [-c " num "] [-e " expr "] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec quote
.RI "[-d] [-l] [-c " num "] [-e " expr "] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec mime
.RI "[-d] [-hd] [-bd] [-part " num "] [-l] [-ec " code "] [-qp] [-dc] [-e " expr "] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec csv
.RI "[-d] [-t] [-l] [-e " expr "] [-html] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec xml
.RI "[-d] [-p] [-l] [-e " expr "] [-tsv] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec zlib
.RI "[-d] [-gz] [-crc] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec lzo
.RI "[-d] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec bzip
.RI "[-d] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec iconv
.RI "[-ic " code "] [-oc " code "] [-ol " ltype "] [-cn] [-wc] [-um] [" file "]"
.br
.B cbcodec date
.RI "[-wf] [-rf] [-utc] [" str "]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B cbcodec
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBcbcodec\fP is  a tool to use encoding and decoding features provided
by Cabin. This command is used in the above format. \fIfile\fP specifies a
input file. If it is omitted, the standard input is read.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the
file:///usr/share/doc/qdbm-doc/spex.html#cabincli.
.TP
.B \-d
perform decoding (unescaping), not encoding (escaping).
.TP
.B \-br
break up URL into elements.
.TP
.B \-rs
resolve relative URL.
.TP
.B \-l
output the tailing newline.
.TP
.BI "\-e " expr
specify input data directly.
.TP
.BI "\-c " num
limit the number of columns of the encoded data.
.TP
.B \-hd
parse MIME and extract headers in TSV format.
.TP
.B \-bd
parse MIME and extract the body.
.TP
.BI "\-part " num
parse MIME and extract a part.
.TP
.BI "\-ec " code
specify the input encoding, which is UTF-8 by default.
.TP
.B \-qp
use quoted-printable encoding, which is Base64 by default.
.TP
.B \-dc
output the encoding name instead of the result string when decoding.
.TP
.B \-t
parse CSV. Convert the data into TSV. Tab and new-line in a cell are
deleted.
.TP
.B \-html
parse CSV. Convert the data into HTML.
.TP
.B \-p
parse XML. Show tags and text sections with dividing headers.
.TP
.B \-tsv
parse XML. Show the result in TSV format. Characters of tabs and
new-lines are URL-encoded.
.TP
.B \-gz
use GZIP format.
.TP
.B \-crc
output the CRC32 checksum as hexadecimal and big endian.
.TP
.BI "\-ic " code
specify the input encoding, which is detected automatically by
default.
.TP
.BI "\-oc " code
specify the output encoding, which is UTF-8 by default.
.TP
.BI "\-ol " ltype
convert line feed characters, with `unix'(LF), `dos'(CRLF), and
`mac'(CR).
.TP
.B \-cn
detect the input encoding and show its name.
.TP
.B \-wc
count the number of characters of the input string of UTF-8.
.TP
.B \-um
output mappings of UCS-2 characters and C strings of UTF-16BE and UTF-8.
.TP
.B \-wf
output in W3CDTF format.
.TP
.B \-rf
output in RFC 1123 format.
.TP
.B \-utc
output the coordinate universal time.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qdbm (3),
.BR cabin (3).
.SH AUTHOR
QDBM was written by Mikio Hirabayashi <mikio@fallabs.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Fumitoshi UKAI <ukai@debian.or.jp>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
