.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH HVMGR 1 "2005-05-23" "Man Page" "Quick Database Manager"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
hvmgr \- administration utility for QDBM Hovel
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hvmgr create
.RI "[-qdbm " "bnum dnum " "] [-s] " name
.br
.B hvmgr store
.RI "[-qdbm] [-kx] [-vx|-vf] [-insert] " name " " key " " val
.br
.B hvmgr delete
.RI "[-qdbm] [-kx] " name " " key
.br
.B hvmgr fetch
.RI "[-qdbm] [-kx] [-ox] [-n] " name " " key
.br
.B hvmgr list
.RI "[-qdbm] [-ox] " name
.br
.B hvmgr optimize
.RI "[-qdbm] " name
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B hvmgr
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBhvmgr\fP is a utility for debugging Hovel and its applications. It
features editing and checking of a database. It can be used for
database applications with shell scripts. This command is used in the
above format.  \fIname\fP specifies a database name. \fIkey\fP
specifies the key of a record. \fIval\fP specifies the value of a
record.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the
file:///usr/share/doc/qdbm-doc/spex.html#hovelcli.
.TP
.BI "\-qdbm [" bnum " " dnum "]"
use `gdbm_open2' to open the database. \fIbnum\fP specifies
the number of the elements of the bucket array. \fIdnum\fP specifies the number
of division of the database.
.TP
.B \-s
make the file sparse.
.TP
.B \-kx
treat \fIkey\fP as a binary expression of hexadecimal notation.
.TP
.B \-vx
treat \fIval\fP as a binary expression of hexadecimal notation.
.TP
.B \-vf
read the value from a file specified with \fIval\fP.
.TP
.B \-insert
specify the storing mode for `GDBM_INSERT'.
.TP
.B \-ox
treat the output as a binary expression of hexadecimal notation.
.TP
.B \-n
do not output the trailing newline.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qdbm (3),
.BR hovel (3).
.SH AUTHOR
QDBM was written by Mikio Hirabayashi <mikio@fallabs.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Fumitoshi UKAI <ukai@debian.or.jp>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
