.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH ODMGR 1 "2005-05-23" "Man Page" "Quick Database Manager"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
odmgr \- administration utility for QDBM Odeum
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B odmgr create
.I name
.br
.B odmgr put
.RI "[-uri " str "] [-title " str "] [-author " str "] [-date " str "] [-wmax " num "] [-keep] " name " [" file "]"
.br
.B odmgr out
.RI "[-id] " name " " expr
.br
.B odmgr get
.RI "[-id] [-t|-h] " name " " expr
.br
.B odmgr search
.RI "[-max " num "] [-or] [-idf] [-t|-h|-n] " name " " words...
.br
.B odmgr list
.RI "[-t|-h] " name
.br
.B odmgr optimize
.I name
.br
.B odmgr inform
.I name
.br
.B odmgr merge
.I name elems...
.br
.B odmgr remove
.I name
.br
.B odmgr break
.RI "[-h|-k|-s] [" file "]"
.br
.B odmgr version
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B odmgr
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.

\fBodmgr\fP is a utility for debugging Odeum and its applications. It
features editing and checking of a database. It can be used for
full-text search systems with shell scripts. This command is used in
the above format. \fIname\fP specifies a database name. \fIfile\fP
specifies a file name, \fIexpr\fP specifies the URI or the ID number
of a document, \fIwords\fP specifies searching words. \fIelems\fP specifies
element databases.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the
file:///usr/share/doc/qdbm-doc/spex.html#odeumcli .
.TP
.BI "\-uri "
specify the URI of the document explicitly.
.TP
.BI "\-title " str
specify the title of the document.
.TP
.BI "\-author " str
specify the author of the document.
.TP
.BI "\-date " str
specify the modified date of the document.
.TP
.BI "\-wmax " num
specify the max number of words to be stored.
.TP
.B \-keep
the storing mode is not to be overwrite.
.TP
.B \-id
specify a document not by a URI but by an ID number.
.TP
.B \-t
output the details of a document in tab separated format.
.TP
.B \-h
output the details of a document in human-readable format.
.TP
.B \-k
output keywords of a document.
.TP
.B \-s
output summary of a document.
.TP
.BI "\-max " num
specify the max number of documents of the output.
.TP
.B \-or
perform OR search, nut AND search.
.TP
.B \-idf
tune scores with IDF.
.TP
.B \-n
show ID numbers and scores only.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qdbm (3),
.BR odidx (1),
.BR odeum (3).
.BR odopen (3).
.SH AUTHOR
QDBM was written by Mikio Hirabayashi <mikio@fallabs.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Fumitoshi UKAI <ukai@debian.or.jp>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
