.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH VLMGR 1 "2005-05-23" "Man Page" "Quick Database Manager"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
vlmgr \- administration utility for QDBM Villa
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vlmgr create
.RI "[-cz|-cy|-cx] " name
.br
.B vlmgr put
.RI "[-kx|-ki] [-vx|-vi|-vf] [-keep|-cat|-dup] " name " " key " " val
.br
.B vlmgr out
.RI "[-l] [-kx|-ki] " name " " key
.br
.B vlmgr get
.RI "[-nl] [-l] [-kx|-ki] [-ox] [-n] " name " " key
.br
.B vlmgr list
.RI "[-nl] [-k|-v] [-kx|-ki] [-ox] [-top " key "] [-bot " key "] [-gt] [-lt] [-max " num "] [-desc] " name
.br
.B vlmgr optimize
.I name
.br
.B vlmgr inform
.RI "[-nl] " name
.br
.B vlmgr remove
.I name
.br
.B vlmgr repair
.RI "[-ki] " name
.br
.B vlmgr exportdb
.RI "[-ki] " name " " file
.br
.B vlmgr importdb
.RI "[-ki] " name " " file
.br
.B vlmgr version
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B vlmgr
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBvlmgr\fP is a utility for debugging Villa and its applications. It
features editing and checking of a database. It can be used for
database applications with shell scripts. This command is used in the
above format.  \fIname\fP specifies a database name. \fIkey\fP
specifies the key of a record. \fIval\fP specifies the value of a
record.
.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the
file:///usr/share/doc/qdbm-doc/spex.html#villacli.
.TP
.B \-cz
compress leaves in the database with ZLIB.
.TP
.B \-cy
compress leaves in the database with LZO.
.TP
.B \-cx
compress leaves in the database with BZIP2.
.TP
.B \-l
all records corresponding the key are dealt.
.TP
.B \-kx
treat \fIkey\fP as a binary expression of hexadecimal notation.
.TP
.B \-ki
treat \fIkey\fP as an integer expression of decimal notation.
.TP
.B \-vx
treat \fIval\fP as a binary expression of hexadecimal notation.
.TP
.B \-vi
treat \fIval\fP as an integer expression of decimal notation.
.TP
.B \-vf
read the value from a file specified with \fIval\fP.
.TP
.B \-keep
specify the storing mode for `VL_DKEEP'.
.TP
.B \-cat
specify the storing mode for `VL_DCAT'.
.TP
.B \-dup
specify the storing mode for `VL_DDUP'.
.TP
.B \-nl
open the database without file locking.
.TP
.BI "\-top " key
specify the top key of listing.
.TP
.BI "\-bot " key
specify the bottom key of listing.
.TP
.B \-gt
do not include the top key of listing.
.TP
.B \-lt
do not include the bottom key of listing.
.TP
.BI "\-max " num
specify the max number of listing.
.TP
.BI \-desc
list in descending order.
.TP
.B \-ox
treat the output as a binary expression of hexadecimal notation.
.TP
.B \-n
do not output the tailing newline.
.TP
.B \-k
output keys only.
.TP
.B \-v
output values only.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR qdbm (3)
.BR vltsv (1),
.BR villa (3),
.BR vlopen (3).
.SH AUTHOR
QDBM was written by Mikio Hirabayashi <mikio@fallabs.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Fumitoshi UKAI <ukai@debian.or.jp>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
